2025
1. Vijay was Deputy Commissioner of remote district of Hilly Northern State of the country for the last two years.
In the month of August heavy rains lashed the complete state followed by cloud burst in the upper reaches of the
said district. The damage was very heavy in the complete state especially in the affected district. The complete
road network and telecommunication were disrupted and the buildings were damaged extensively. People’s
houses have been destroyed and they were forced to stay in open. More than 200 people have been killed and
about 5000 were badly injured. The Civil Administration under Vijay got activated and started conducting rescue
and relief operations. Temporary shelter camps and hospitals were established to provide shelter and medical
facilities to the homeless and injured people. Helicopter services were pressed in, for evacuating sick and old
people from remote areas. Vijay got a message from his hometown in Kerala that his mother was seriously sick.
After two days Vijay received the unfortunate message that his mother has expired. Vijay has no close relative
except one elder sister who was US citizen and staying there for last several years. In the meantime, the
situation in the affected district deteriorated further due to resumption of heavy rains after a gap of five days. At
the same time, continuous messages were coming on his mobile from his hometown to reach at the earliest for
performing last rites of his mother.
a) What are the options available with Vijay?
b) What are the ethical dilemma being faced by Vijay?
c) Critically evaluate and examine each of these options identified by Vijay.
d) Which of the options, do you think, would be most appropriate for Vijay to adopt and why? (Answer in 250
words)
2. In line with the Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Indian Constitution, the government has a
constitutional obligation to ensure basic needs – Roti, Kapda aur Makan (Food, Clothes and Shelter) – for the
under-privileged. Pursuing this mandate, the district administration proposed clearing a portion of forest land to
develop housing for the homeless and economically weaker sections of the society.
The proposed land, however, is an ecologically sensitive zone densely populated with age-old trees, medicinal
plants and vital biodiversity. Besides, these forests help to regulate micro-climate and rainfalls, provide habitat for
wildlife, support soil fertility and prevent land/soil erosion and sustain livelihoods of tribal and nomadic
communities.
Inspite of the ecological and social costs, the administration argues in favour of the said proposal by highlighting
that this very initiative addresses fundamental human rights as a critical welfare priority. Besides, it fulfils the
government’s duty to uplift and empower the poor through inclusive housing development. Further, these forest
areas have become unsafe due to wild-animal threats and recurring human-wildlife conflicts. Lastly, clearing
forest-zones may help to curb anti-social elements allegedly using these areas as hideouts, thereby enhancing
law and order.
a) Can deforestation be ethically justified in the pursuit of social welfare objectives like, housing for the
homeless?

(b) What are the socio-economic, administrative and ethical challenges in balancing environmental conservation
with human development?
(c) What substantial alternatives or policy interventions can be proposed to ensure that both environmental
integrity and human dignity are protected? (Answer in 250 words)
3. Subash is Secretary, PWD in the State Government. He is a senior officer, known for his competence, integrity
and dedication to work. He enjoys the trust and confidence of Minister Incharge of PWD and Programme
Implementation. As a part of his job profile, he is responsible for policy formulation, execution of projects relating
to infrastructure initiatives in the State. Besides, he oversees the technical and administrative aspects relating to
planning, designing and construction etc.
Subash’s Minister is an important Minister in the state and significant growth in urban infrastructure development
and road network has been registered during his tenure. He is very keen for launching of ambitious road
construction project in the near future.
Subash is in regular touch with the Minister and is working various modalities of road construction project.
Regular meetings, interactions and presentations are made by him to the Minister before a formal public
announcement of the project is made by the Minister. Subash’s only son Vikas is in real estate business. His son
from his own sources is aware that a mega road project is on the anvil and announcement in this regard is
expected anytime. He is very keen to know from his father the exact location of the upcoming project. He knows
that there would be quantum jump in the prices of land in the vicinity. Buying land at this stage at cheaper prices
would pay him rich dividends. He is pleading with him (his father) day in and day out to share him location of the
proposed project. He assured him that he would handle the matter discreetly as it would not attract any adverse
notice as he in the normal course, keeps on buying land as a part of his business. He feels pressurised because
of constant pleadings by his son.
Another significant aspect of the matter pertained to the extra/undue i+nterest in the above project by the
Minister PWD. His nephew was also having big infrastructure project company. In fact, the Minister has also
introduced his nephew to him and indicated to him to take care of his nephew’s business interest in the
forthcoming project. The Minister encouraged him to act fast in the matter as early announcement and execution
of mega road project would enhance his status in the party and public life.
In the above backdrop, Subash is in a fix as to the future course of action.
(a) Discuss the ethical issues involved in the case.
(b) Critically examine the options available to Subash in the above situation.
(c) Which of the above would be most appropriate and why? (Answer in 250 words)

4. Rajesh is a Group A officer with nine years of service. He is posted as Administrative Officer in an Oil Public
Sector undertaking. As an Administrative Officer he is responsible for managing and coordinating various
administrative tasks to ensure smooth functioning of office. He also manages office supplies, equipment etc.
Rajesh is now sufficient senior and is expecting his next promotion in JAG (Junior Administrative Grade) in the
next one or two years. He knows that promotion is based on examination of ACRs/Performance Appraisal of last
five years (5 years or so) of an officer by a DPC (Departmental Promotion Committee) and an officer lacking
requisite grading of ACRs may not be found fit for promotion. Consequences of losing promotion may entail
financial and reputational loss and set-back for career progression. Though he also puts his best efforts in official
discharge of his duties, yet he is unsure of assessment by his superior officer. He is now putting extra efforts so
that he gets thumping report at the end of financial year.
As Administrative Officer, Rajesh is regularly interacting with his immediate boss, who is his reporting officer for
writing his ACR. One day he calls Rajesh and wants him to buy computer-related stationery on priority from a
particular vendor. Rajesh instructs his office to initiate action for procuring these items. During the day, the
dealing Assistant brings an estimate of Rupees Thirty Five Lakhs covering all stationery items from the same
vendor. It is noticed that as per delegated financial powers, as provided in the GFR (General Financial Rules) as
applicable in that Organisation, expenditure for office items exceeding Rupees Thirty Lakhs requires sanction of
the next higher authority (boss in the present case). Rajesh knows that immediate superior would expect all
these purchases should be done at his level and may not appreciate such lack of initiative on his part. During
discussions with office, he learns that common practice of splitting of expenditure (where large order is divided
into a series of smaller ones) is followed to avoid obtaining sanction from higher authority. This practice is
against the rules and may come to the adverse notice of Audit.
Rajesh is perturbed. He is unsure of taking decision in the matter.
(a) What are the options available with Rajesh in the above situation?
(b) What are the ethical issues involved in this case?
(c) Which would be the most appropriate option for Rajesh and why? (Answer in 250 words)
5. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Program, MGNREGA was earlier known as National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, NREGA. It is an Indian Social Welfare Program that aimed at fulfilling
the ‘Right to Work’ provisions made in the Constitution. MGNREGA was launched in 2006 under Rural
Employment Sector by the Ministry of Rural Development.
Main objective of the program is to give legal guarantee of wage employment to the adult members of rural
households who are willing to do unskilled manual labour work subject to a maximum of 100 days per year for
every household. Every rural household has the right to register under the scheme, job card is issued to the
registered, Job Card holder can seek employment; State Government shall pay 25% of minimum wage for the
first 30 days as compensatory daily unemployment allowance to the families and of wage for remaining period of
the year. MGNREGA work was undertaken by various Gram Panchayats.

You have been appointed as an Administrator Incharge of the District. You have been given the responsibility of
monitoring MGNREGA work undertaken by various Gram Panchayats. You are also given the authority to give
technical sanctions to all MGNREGA works.
In one of the Panchayats in your jurisdiction, you notice that your predecessor has mismanaged the Program in
terms of :
(i) Money not disbursed to actual job-seekers.
(ii) Muster Rolls of the Labourers not properly maintained.
(iii) Mismatch between the work done and payments made.
(iv) Payments made to fictitious persons.
(v) Job Cards were given without looking into the need of person.
(vi) Mismanagement of funds and to the extent of siphoning of funds.
(vii) Approved works that never existed.
(a) What is your reaction to the above situation and how do you restore the proper functioning of MGNREGA
Program in this regard?
(b) What actions would you initiate to solve the various issues listed above?
(c) How would you deal with the above situation? (Answer in 250 words)
6. Ashok is Divisional Commissioner of one of the border districts of the North East State. A few years back,
Military has taken over the neighbouring country after overthrowing the elected civil government. Civil war
situation is prevailing in the country especially in last two years. However, internal situation further deteriorated
due to rebel groups taking over control of certain populated areas near own border. Due to intense fight between
military and rebel groups, civilian casualties has increased manifold in recent past. In the meantime, in one night
Ashok got information from the local police guarding the border check post that there are about 200-250 people
mainly women and children trying to cross over to our side of the border. There are also about 10 soldiers with
their weapons in military uniform part of this group who wants to cross over. Women and Children are also crying
and begging for help. A few of them are injured and bleeding profusely need immediate medical care. Ashok
tried to contact Home Secretary of the State but failed to do so due to poor connectivity mainly due to inclement
weather.
(a) What are the options available with Ashok to cope with the situation?
(b) What are the ethical and legal dilemmas being faced by Ashok?

(c) Which of the options, do you think would be more appropriate for Ashok to adopt and why?
(d) In the present situation, what are the extra precautionary measures to be taken by the Border Guarding
Police in dealing with soldiers in uniform? (Answer in 250 words)
2024
Q.1 There is a technological company named ABC Incorporated which is the second largest worldwide, situated
in the Third World. You are the Chief Executive Officer and the majority shareholder of this company. The fast
technological improvements have raised worries among environmental activists, regulatory authorities, and the
general public over the sustainability of this scenario. You confront substantial issues about the business's
environmental footprint. In 2023, your organization had a significant increase of 48% in greenhouse gas
emissions compared to the levels recorded in 2019. The significant rise in energy consumption is mainly due to
the surging energy requirements of your data centers, fuelled by the exponential expansion of Artificial
Intelligence (AI). AI-powered services need much more computational resources and electrical energy compared
to conventional online activities, notwithstanding their notable gains. The technology's proliferation has led to a
growing concern over the environmental repercussions, resulting in an increase in warnings. Al models,
especially those used in extensive machine learning and data processing, exhibit much greater energy
consumption than conventional computer tasks, with an exponential increase.
Although there is already a commitment and goal to achieve net zero emissions by 2030, the challenge of
lowering emissions seems overwhelming as the integration of AI continues to increase. To achieve this goal,
substantial investments in renewable energy use would be necessary. The difficulty is exacerbated by the
competitive environment of the technology sector, where rapid innovation is essential for preserving market
standing and shareholders' worth. To achieve a balance between innovation, profitability and sustainability, a
strategic move is necessary that is in line with both, business objectives and ethical obligations.
(a) What is your immediate response to the challenges posed in the above case?
(b) Discuss the ethical issues involved in the above case.
(c) Your company has been identified to be penalized by technological giants. What logical and ethical
arguments will you put forth to convince about its necessity?
(d) Being a conscience being, what measures would you adopt to maintain balance between AI innovation and
environmental footprint?
Q.2 Raman is a senior IPS officer and has recently been posted as D.G. of a state. Among the various issues
and problems/challenges which needed his immediate attention, the issue relating to recruitment of unemployed
youth by an unknown terrorist group, was a matter of grave concern. It was noted that unemployment was
relatively high in the state. The problem of unemployment amongst graduates and those with higher education
was much more grave. Thus they were vulnerable and soft targets. In the review meeting taken by him with
senior officers of DIG Range and above, it came to light that a new terrorist group has emerged at the global
level. It has launched a massive drive to recruit young unemployed people. Special focus was to pick young
people from a particular community. The said organisation seemed to have the clear objective e of utilising/using

them for carrying out militant activities. It was also gathered that the said (new) group is desperately trying to
spread its tentacles in his state. A definite/reliable intelligence tip was received by the State CID and Cyber Cell
that a large number of such unemployed youth have already been contacted by the terrorist outfit/group through
social media and local communal organisations and other contacts. The need of the hour was to act swiftly and
to check these elements/designs before they assume serious proportions. Discrete inquiries made by the police,
through the Cyber Cell, revealed that good numbers of unemployed youth are very active on Facebook,
Instagram and Twitter. On an average, many of them were spending 6&8 hours each day, using electronic
devices/internet, etc. It also came to light that such unemployed youth were showing sympathy and endorsing
the messages received from certain persons, allegedly the contact persons of that global terrorist group. Their
social media accounts revealed their strong affinity to such groups inasmuch as many of them started forwarding
anti-national tweets on their WhatsApp and Facebook, etc. It seemed that they succumbed to their ploy and
started propagating secessionist ideology. Their posts were hyper-critical of the government's initiatives, policies
and subscribing to eñtreme beliefs and promoting extremism. Power tactics
(a) What are the options available to Raman to tackle the above situation?
(b) What measures would you suggest for strengthening the eñisting set&up to ensure that such groups do not
succeed in penetrating 'and vitiating the atmosphere in the state?
(c) In the above scenario, what action plan would you advise for enhancing the intelligence gathering mechanism
of the police force?
Q.3 With multipronged strategy of the Central and State Governments specially in the last few years, the naxalite
problem has been resolved to a large extent in the affected states of the country. However, there are a few
pockets in certain states where naxalite problem still persists, mainly due to involvement of foreign countries.
Rohit is posted as SP (Special Operations) for the last one year, in one of the districts which is still affected by
the naxalite problem. The district administration has taken a lot of developmental works in the recent past in the
naxalite affected areas to win the hearts and minds of the people. Over a period of time, Rohit has established
an excellent intelligence network to get the real time information regarding the movement of naxalite cadre. To
instill confidence in the public and have moral ascendancy over the naxalites, a number of cordons and search
operations are being conducted by the police. Rohit, who himself was leading one of the contingents got a
message though his intelligence source that about ten hard core naxalites were hiding in a particular village with
sophisticated weapons. Without wasting any time, Rohit reached the target village with his team and laid out a
foolproof cordon and started carrying out a systematic search. During the search, his team managed to
overpower all the naxalites along with their automatic weapons. However, in the meantime, more than five
hundred tribal women surrounded the village and started marching towards the target house. They were
shouting and demanding the immediate release of insurgents since they are their protectors and saviours. The
situation on the ground was becoming very critical as the tribal women were extremely agitated and aggressive.
Rohit tried to contact his superior officer, IG (Special Operations) of the state on the radio set and on mobile
phone, but failed to do so due to poor connectivity Rohit was in great dilemma since out of the naxalites
apprehended, two were not only hard core top insurgents with prize money of ten lakhs on their heads, but were
also involved in a recent ambush on the security forces. However, if he did not release the naxalites, the situation
could get out of control since the tribal women were aggressively charging towards them. In that case, to control

the situation Rohit might have to resort to firing which may lead to valuable loss of lives of civilians and would
further complicate the situation.
(a) What are the options available with Rohit to cope with the situation?
(b) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by Rohit?
(c) Which of the options, do you think, would be more appropriate for Rohit to adopt and why?
(d) In the present situation, what are the extra precautionary measures to be taken by the police in dealing with
women protesters?
Q.4 Sneha is a Senior Manager working for a big (reputed) hospital chain in a mid-sized city. She has been
made in-charge of the new super speciality center that the hospital is building with state&of&the art equipment
and world class medical facilities- The building has been reconstructed and she is starting the process of
procurement for various equipment and machines. As the head of the committee responsible for procurement,
she has invited bids from all the interested reputed vendors dealing in medical equipment. She notices that her
brother, who is a well-known supplier in this domain, has also sent his expression of interest. Since the hospital
is privately owned, it is not mandatory for her to select only the lower bidder. Also, she is aware that her brother's
company has been facing some financial difficulties and a big supply order will help him recover. At the same
time, allocating the contract to her brother might bring charges of favouritism against her and tarnish her image
The hospital management trusts her fully and would support any decision of hers.
(a) What should be Sneha's course of action?
(b) How would she justify what she chooses to do?
(c) In this case, how is medical ethics compromised with vested personal interest?
Q.5 With the summer heat being eñceptionally severe this year, the district has been facing severe water
shortage. The District Collector has been mobilizing his subordinate officials to conserve the remaining water
reserves for preventing the district from plunging into acute drinking water crisis. Along with an awareness
campaign, for conserving water, (strict measures have been taken for stopping the over-exploitation of
ground-water. Vigilance teams have been deployed to tour the villages and find the farmers who are drawing
water from deep borewells or from the river reservoir for irrigation. The farmers are agitated by such action. A
delegation of farmers meets the District Collector with their issues and complains that while they are not being
allowed to irrigate their crops. big industries located near the river are drawing huge amounts of water through
deep borewells for their industrial processes. The farmers allege that their administration is anti-farmer and
corrupt, being bribed by the industry. The district needs to placate the farmers as they are threatening to go on a
prolonged protest. At the same time, the District Collector has to deal with the water crisis. The industry cannot
be closed as this would result in a large number of workers being unemployed.
(a) Discuss all options available to the District Collector as a District Magistrate.

(b) What suitable actions can be taken in view of mutually compatible interests of the stakeholders?
(c) What are the potential administrative and ethical dilemmas for the District Collector?
Q.6 Dr. Srinivasan is a senior scientist working for a reputed biotechnology company known for its cutting-edge
research in pharmaceuticals. Dr. Srinivasan is heading a research team working on a new drug aimed at treating
a rapidly spreading variant of a new viral infectious disease. The disease has been rapidly spreading across the
world and the cases reported in the country are increasing. There is huge pressure on Dr. Srinivasan's team to
expedite the trials for the drug as there is significant market for it, and the company wants to get the first-mover
advantage in the market. During a team meeting, some senior team members suggest some shortcut for
expediting the clinical trials for the drug and for getting the requisite approvals. These include manipulating data
to exclude some negative outcomes and selectively reporting positive results, foregoing the process of informed
consent and using compounds already patented by a rival company, rather than developing one's own
component. Dr. Srinivasan is not comfortable taking such shortcuts, at the same time he realises meeting the
targets is impossible without using these means.
(a) What would you do in such a situation?
(b) Examine your options and consequences in the light of the ethical questions involved.
(c) How can data ethics and drug ethics save humanity at large in such a scenario?
2023
1. You are working as an executive in a nationalised bank for several years. One day one of your close
colleagues tells you that her father is suffering from heart disease and needs surgery immediately to survive.
She also tells you that she has no insurance and the operation will cost about 10 lakh. You are also aware of the
fact that her husband is no more and that she is from a lower middle class family. You are empathetic about her
situation, However, apart from expressing your sympathy, you do not have the resources to find her. A few
weeks later, you ask her about the well-being of her father and she informs you about his successful surgery and
that he is recovering. She then confides in you that the bank manager was kind enough to facilitate the release
of `10 lakh from a dormant acement of someone to pay for the operation with a promise that it should be
confidential and be repaid at the earliest. She has already started paying it back and will continue to do until it is
all returned.
(a) What are the ethical issues involved?
(b) Evaluate the behaviour of the bank manager from an ethical point of view.
(c) How would you react to the situation?
2. A Iandslide occurred in the middle of the night on 20th July, 2023 in a remote mountain hamlet, approximately
60 kilometres from Uttarkashi. The landslide was caused by torrential rains and has resulted in large-scale
destruction of property and life. You, as District Magistrate of that area, have rushed to the spot with a team of
doctors, NGOs, media and police along with numerous support staff to oversee the rescue operations. A man
came running to you with a request for urgent medical help for his pregnant wife who is in labour and is losing
blood. You directed your medical team to examine his wife. They return and convey to you that this woman

needs blood transfusion immediately. Upon enquiry, you come to know that a few blood collection bags and
blood group test kits are available in the ambulance accompanying your team. Few people of your team have
already volunteered to donate blood.
Being a physician who has graduated from AIIMS, you know that blood for transfusion needs to be procured only
through a recognized blood bank. Your team members are divided on this issue; some favour transfusion, while
Home others oppose it. The doctors in the team are ready to facilitate the delivery provided they are not
penalized for transfusion. Now you are in a dilemma. Your professional training emphasizes on prioritising
service to humanity and saving lives of individuals.
(a) What are the ethical issues involved in this case ?
(b) Evaluate the options available to you, being District Magistrate of the area.
3. At 9 pm on Saturday evening, Rashika, a Joint Secretary, was still engrossed in her work in her office. Her
husband, Vikram, is an executive in an MNC and frequently out of town in connection with his work. Their two
children aged 5 and 3 are looked after by their domestic helper. At 9.30 pm her superior, Mr. Suresh calls her
and asks her to prepare a detailed note on an important matter to be discussed in a meeting in the Ministry. She
realises that she will have to work on Sunday to finish the additional task given by her superior. She reflects on
how she had looked forward to this posting and had worked long hours for months to achieve it. She had kept
the welfare of people uppermost in discharging her duties. She feels that she has not done enogh justice to her
family and she has not fulfilled her duties in discharging essential social obligations. Even as recently as last
month she had to leave her sick child in the nanny's care as she had to work in the office. Now she feels that she
must draw a line, beyond which her personal life should take precedence over her professional responsibilities-
She thinks that there should be reasonable limits to the work ethics such as punctuality, hard work. dedication to
duty and selfless service.
(a) Discuss the ethical issues involved in this case.
(b) Briefly describe at least four laws that have been enacted by the Government with respect to providing a
healthy, safe and equitable working environment for women.
(c) Imagine you are in a similar situation. What suggestions would you make to mitigate such working
conditions?
4. Vinod is an honest and sincere IAS officer. Recently, he has taken over as Managing Director of the State
Road Transport Corporation, his sixth transfer in the past three years. His peers acknowledge his vast
knowledge, affability and uprightness.
The Chairman of the State Road Transport Corporation is a powerful politician and is very close to the Chief
Minister. Vinod comes to know about many alleged irregularities of the Corporation and the highhandedness of
the Chairman in financial matters.
A Board Member of the Corporation belonging to the Opposition Party meets Vinod and hands over a few
documents along with a video recording in which the Chairman appears to be demanding bribe for placing a
huge order for the supply of QMR tyres. Vinod recollects the Chairman expediting clearing of pending bills of
QMR tyrews.
Vinod confronts the Board Member as to why he is shying away from exposing the Chairman with the socalled
solid proof he has with him. The member informs him that the Chairman refuses to yield to his threats.

He adds that Vinod may earn recognition and public support if he himself exposes the Chairman. Further, he tells
Vinod that once his party comes to power. Vinod's professional growth would be assured. Vinod is aware that he
may be penalized if he exposes the Chairman and may further be transferred to a distant place. He knows that
the Opposition Party stands a better chance of coming to power in the forthcoming elections. However, he also
realizes that the Board Member is trying to use him for his own political gains.
(a) As a conscientious civil servant, evaluate the options available to Vinod.
(b) In the light of the above case, comment upon the ethical issues that may arise due to the politicization of
bureaucracy.
5. You have just been appointed as Additional Director General of Central Public Works Department. The Chlef
Architect of your division, who is to retire in six months, is passionately working on a very important project, the
successful completion of which would earn him a lasting reputation for the rest of his life. A new lady architect.
Seema, trained at Manchester School of Architecture, UK joined as Senior Architect in your division. During the
briefing about the project, Seema made some suggestions which would not only add value to the project, but
would also reduce completion time. This has made the Chief Architect insecure and he is constantly worried that
all the credit will go to her. Subsequently, he adopted a passive and aggressive behaviour towards her and has
become disrespectful to her. Seema felt it embarrassing as the Chief Architect left no chance of humiliating her.
He would very often correct her in front of other colleagues and raise his voice while speaking to her. This
continuous harassment has resulted in her losing confidence and self- esteem. She felt perpetually tensed,
anxious and stressed. She appeared to be in awe of him since he has had a long tenure in the office and has
vast experience in the area of her work. You are aware of her outstanding academic credentials and career
record in her previous organisations. However, you fear that this harassment may result in compromising her
much needed contribution in this important project and may adversely impact her emotional well-being. You have
also come to know from her peers that aho is contemplating tendering her resignation.
(a) What are the ethical issues involved in the above case?
(b) What are the options available to you in order to complete the project as well as to retain Seema in the
organization?
(c) What would be your response to Seema's predicament? What measures would you institute to prevent such
occurrences from happening in your organization?
6. You hold a responsible position in a ministry in the government, One day in the morning you received a call
from the school of your 11-year-old son that you are required to come and meet the Principal. You proceed to the
school and find your son in the Principal's office. The Principal informs you that your son had been found
wandering aimlessly in the grounds during the time classes were in progress. The class teacher further informs
you that your son has lately become a loner and did not respond to questions in the class, he had also been
unable to perform well in the football trials held recently. You bring your son back from the school and in the
evening, you along with your wife try to find out the reasons for your son's changed behaviour. After repeated
cajoling, your son shares that some children had been making fun of him in the class as well as in the WhatsApp
group of the students by calling him stunted, duh and a frog. He tells you the names of a few children who are
the main culprits but pleads with you to let the matter rest.

After a few days, during a sporting event, where you and your wife have gone to watch your son play, one of
your colleague's son shows you a video in which students have caricatured your son. Further, he also points out
to the perpetrators who were sitting in the stands. You purposefully walk past them with your son and go home.
Next day, you find on social media, a video denigrating you, your son and even your wife, stating that you
engaged in physical bullying of children on the sports field. The video became viral on social media. Your friends
and colleagues began calling you to find out the details. One of your juniors advised you to make a counter video
giving the background and explaining that nothing had happened on the field. You, in turn posted a video which
you have captured during the sporting event, identifying the likely perpetrators who were responsible for your
son's predicament. You have also narrated what has actually happened in the field and made attempts to bring
out the adverse effects of the misuse of social media.
(a) Based on the above case study, discuss the ethical issues involved in the use of social media.
(b) Discuss the pros and cons of using social media by you to put across the facts to counter the fake
propaganda against your family.
2022
1. Prabhat was working as Vice President (Marketing) at Sterling Electric Ltd., a reputed multinational company.
But presently the company was passing through the difficult times as the sales were continuously showing
downward trend in the last two quarters. His division, which hitherto had been a major revenue contributor to the
company's financial health, was now desperately trying to procure some big government order for them. But their
best efforts did not yield any positive success or breakthrough. His was a professional company and his local
bosses were under pressure from their London-based HO to show some positive results. In the last performance
review meeting taken by the Executive Director (India Head), he was reprimanded for his poor performance. He
assured them that his division is working on a special contract from the Ministry of Defence for a secret
installation near Gwalior and tender is being submitted shortly.
He was under extreme pressure and he was deeply perturbed. What aggravated the situation further was a
warning from the top that if the deal is not clinched in favour of the company, his division might have to be closed
and he may have to quit his lucrative job. There was another dimension which was causing him deep mental
torture a and agony. This pertained to his personal precarious financial health. He was a single earner in the
family with two school-college going children and his old ailing mother. The heavy expenditure on education and
medical was causing a big strain to his monthly pay packet. Regular EMI for housing loan taken from bank was
unavoidable and any default would render him liable for severe legal action. In the above backdrop, he was
hoping for some miracle to happen. There was sudden turn of events. His secretary informed that a
gentleman-SubhashVerma wanted to see him as he was interested in the position of Manager which was to be
filled in by him in the company. He further brought to his notice that his CV has been received through the office
of the Minister of Defence. During interview of the candidate-Subhash Verma, he found him technically sound,
resourceful and experienced marketeer. He seemed to be well-conversant with tendering procedures and having
knack of follow-up and liaising in this regard. Prabhat felt that he was better choice than the rest of the
candidates who were recently interviewed by him in the last few days. Subhash Verma also indicated that he
was in possession of the copies of the bid documents that the Unique Electronics Ltd. would be submitting the
next day to the Defence Ministry for their tender. He offered to hand over those documents subject to his
employment in the company on suitable terms and conditions. He made it clear that in the process, the Sterling
Electric Ltd. could outbid their rival company and get the bid and hefty Defence Ministry order. He indicated that
it will be win-win situation for both-him and the company. Prabhat was absolutely stunned. It was a mixed feeling

of shock and thrill. He was uncomfortable and perspiring. If accepted, all his problems would vanish instantly and
he may be rewarded for securing the much awaited tender and thereby boosting company's sales and financial
health. He was in a fix as to the future course of action. He was wonder-struck at the guts of Subhash Verma in
having surreptitiously removing his own company papers and offering to the rival company for a job. Being an
experienced person,he was examining the pros and cons of the proposal/situation and he asked him to come the
next day.
(a) Discuss the ethical issues involved in the case.
(b) Critically examine the options available to Prabhat in the above situation.
(c) Which of the above would be the most appropriate for Prabhat and why?
2. Ramesh is State Civil Services Officer who got the opportunity of getting posted to the capital of a border
State after rendering 20 years of service. Ramesh's mother has recently been detected cancer and has been
admitted in the leading cancer hospital of the city. His two adolescent children have also got admission in one of
the best public schools of the town. After settling down in his appointment as Director in the Home Department of
the State, Ramesh got confidential report through intelligence sources that illegal migrants are infiltrating in the
State from the neighbouring country. He decided to personally carry out surprise check of the border posts along
with his Home Department team. To his surprise, he caught red-handed two families of 12 members infiltrated
with the connivance of the security personnel at the border posts. On further inquiry and investigation, it was
found that after the migrants from neighbouring country infiltrate, their documentation like Aadhaar Card, Ration
Card and Voter Card are also forged and they are made to settle down in a particular area of the State. Ramesh
prepared the detailed and comprehensive report and submitted to the Additional Secretary of the State.
However, he has summoned by the Additional Home Secretary after a week and was instructed to withdraw the
report. The Additional Home Secretary informed Ramesh that the report submitted by him has not been
appreciated by the higher authorities. He further cautioned him that if he fails to withdraw the confidential report,
he will not only be posted out from the prestigious appointment from the State capital but his further promotion
which is due in near future will also get in jeopardy.
(a) What are the Department options available to Ramesh as the Director of the Home Department of the
bordering State?
(b) What option should Ramesh adopt and why?
(c) Critically evaluate each of the options.
(d) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by Ramesh?
(e) What policy measures would you suggest to combat the menace of infiltration of illegal migrants from the
neighbouring country?
3. The Supreme Court has banned mining in the Aravalli Hills to stop degradation of the forest cover and to
maintain ecological balance. However, the stone mining was still prevalent in the border district of the affected
State with connivance of certain corrupt forest officials and politicians. Young and dynamic SP who was recently
posted in the affected district promised to himself to stop this menace. In one of his surprise checks with his
team, he found loaded truck with stone trying to escape the mining area. He tried to stop the truck but the truck
driver overrun the police officer, killing him on the spot and thereafter managed to flee. Police filed FIR but no
breakthrough was achieved in the case for almost three months. Ashok who was the Investigative Journalist
working with leading TV channel, suo moto started investigating the case. Within one month, Ashok got

breakthrough by interacting with local people, stone mining mafia and government officials. He prepared his
investigative story and presented to the CMD of the TV channel. He exposed in his investigative report the
complete nexus of stone mafia working with blessing of corrupt police and civil officials and politicians. The
politician who was involved in the mafia was no one else but local MLA who was considered to be very close to
the Chief Minister. After going through the investigative report, the CMD advised Ashok to drop the idea of
making the story public through electronic media. He informed that the local MLA was not only the relative of the
owner of the TV channel but also had unofficially 20 percent share in the channel. The CMD further informed
Ashok that his further promotion and hike in pay will be taken care of in addition the soft loan of `10 lakhs which
he has taken from the TV channel for his son's chronic disease will be suitably adjusted if he hands over the
investigative report to him.
(a) What are the options available with Ashok to cope up with the situation?
(b) Critically evaluate/examine each of the options identified by Ashok.
(c) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by Ashok?
(d) Which of the options, do you think, would be the most appropriate for Ashok to adopt and why?
(e) In the above scenario, what type of training would you suggest for police officers posted to such districts
where stone mining illegal activities are rampant?
4. You have done MBA from a reputed institution three years back but could not get campus placement due to
COVID-19 generated recession. However, after a lot of persuasion and series of competitive tests including
written and interview, you managed to get a job in a leading shoe company. You have aged parents who are
dependent and staying with you. You also recently got married after getting this decent job. You were allotted the
Inspection Section which is responsible for clearing the final product. In first one year, you learnt your job well
and was appreciated for your performance by the management. The company is doing good business for last
five years in domestic market and this year it is decided even to export to Europe and Gulf countries. However,
one large consignment to Europe was rejected by their Inspecting Team due to certain poor quality and was sent
back. The top management ordered that ibid consignment to be cleared for the domestic market. As a part of
Inspecting Team, you observed the glaring poor quality and brought to the knowledge of the Team Commander.
However, the top management advised all the members of the team to overlook these defects as the
management cannot bear such a huge loss. Rest of the team members except you promptly signed and cleared
the consignment for domestic market, overlooking glaring defects. You again brought to the knowledge of the
Team Commander that such consignment, if cleared even for domestic market, will tarnish the image and
reputation of the company and will be counter-productive in the long run. However, you were further advised by
the top management that if you do not clear the consignment, the company
will not hesitate to terminate your services citing certain innocuous reasons.
(a) Under the given conditions, what are the options available to you as a member of the Inspecting Team?
(b) Critically evaluate each of the options listed by you.
(c) What option would you adopt and why?
(d) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by you?
(e) What can be the consequences of overlooking the observations raised by the inspecting Team?
5. Rakesh was working as Joint Commissioner in Transport Department of a city. As a Part of his Job profile,
among others, he was entrusted with the task of overseeing the control and functioning of City Transport

Department. A case of strike by the drivers' union of City Transport Department over the issue of Compensation
to a driver who died on duty while driving the bus came up before him for decision in the matter.
He gathered that the driver (deceased) was plying Bus No. 528 which Passed through busy and congested
roads of the city. It so happened that near an intersection on the way, there was an accident involving the bus
and a car driver by a middle-aged man. It was found that there was altercation between the driver and the car
driver. Heated arguments between them led to fight and the driver gave him a blow. Lot of passerbys had
gathered and tried to intervene but without success. Eventually, both of them were badly injured and profusely
bleeding and were taken to the nearby hospital. The driver succumbed to the injuries and could not be saved.
The middle-aged driver's condition was also critical but after a day, he recovered and was discharged. Police had
immediately come at the spot of accident and FIR was registered. Police investigation revealed that the quarrel
in question was started by the bus driver and he had resorted to physical violence. There was exchange of blows
between them. The City Transport Department management is considering of not giving any extra compensation
to the driver's (deceased) family. The family is very aggrieved, depressed and agitated against the discriminatory
and non-sympathetic approach of the City Transport Department management. The bus driver (deceased) was
52 years of age, was survived by his wife and two school-college going daughters. He was the sole earner of the
family. The City Transport Department workers' union took up this case and when found no favorable response
from the management, decided to go on strike. The union's demand was two-fold. First was full extra
compensation as given to other drivers who died on duty and secondly employment to onefamily member. The
strike has continued for 10 days and the deadlock remains.
(a) What are the options available to Rakesh to meet the above situation?
(b) Critically examine each of the options identified by Rakesh.
(c) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by Rakesh?
(d) What course of action would Rakesh adopt to diffuse the above situation
6. You are appointed as an officer heading the section in Environment Pollution Control Board to ensure
compliance and its follow-up. In that region, there were large number of small and medium industries which had
been granted clearance you learnt that these industries provide employment to many migrant workers Most of
the industrial units have got environmental clearance certificate in their possession. The environmental clearance
seeks to curb industries and projects that supposedly hamper environment and living species in the region. But
in practice most of these units remain to be polluting units in several ways like air, water and soil pollution. As
such, local people encountered persistent health problems. It was confirmed that majority of the industries were
violating environmental compliance. You issued notice to all the industrial units to apply for fresh environmental
clearance certificate from the competent authority. However, your action met with hostile response from a section
of the industrial units, other vested interest persons and a section of the local politicians. The workers also
became very hostile to you as they felt that your action would lead to the closure these of industrial units, and the
resultant unemployment will lead to insecurity and uncertainty in their livelihood. Many owners of the industries
approached you with the plea that you should not initiate harsh action as it would compel them their units, and
cause huge Financial loss, shortage of their products in the market. These would obviously add to the sufferings
of the labourers and the consumer alike. The labour union also sent you representation requesting against the
closure of the units. You simultaneously started receiving threats from unknown corners. You however received
supports from some of your colleagues, who advised you to act freely to ensure environmental compliance.
Local NGOs also came to your support and they demanded the closure of the polluting units immediately

(a) What are the options available to you under the given situation?
(b) Critically examine the options listed by you.
(c) What type of mechanism would you suggest to ensure environmental compliance?
(d) What are the ethical dilemmas you faced in exercising your option?
2021
1. Sunil is a young civil servant and has a reputation for his competence, integrity, dedication and relentless
pursuit of difficult and onerous jobs. Considering his profile, he was picked up by his bosses to handle a very
challenging and sensitive assignment. He was posted in a tribal dominated district notorious for illegal sand
mining. Excavating sand from river belt and transporting through trucks and selling them in black market was
rampant. This illegal sand mining mafia was operating with the support of local functionaries and tribal
musclemen who in turn were bribing selected poor tribals and had kept the tribals under fear and intimidation.
Sunil being a sharp and energetic officer immediately grasped the ground realities and the modus operandi
followed by the mafia through their devious and dubious mechanism. On making inquiries, he gathered that
some of their own office employees are in hand and glove with them and have developed close unholy nexus.
Sunil initiated stringent action against them and started conducting raids on their illegal operations of movement
of trucks filled with sand. The mafia got rattled as not many officers in the past had taken such strong steps
against the mafia. Some of the office employees who were allegedly close to mafia informed them that the officer
is determined to clean up the mafia’s illegal sand mining operations in that district and may cause them
irreparable damage.
The mafia turned hostile and launched counter-offensive. The tribal musclemen and mafia started threatening
him with dire consequences. His family (wife and old mother) were stalked and were under virtual surveillance
and thus causing mental torture, agony and stress to all of them. The matter assumed serious proportions when
a muscleman came to his office and threatened him to stop raids, etc., otherwise, his fate will not be different
than some of his predecessors (ten years back one officer was killed by the mafia).
(a) Identify the different options available to Sunil in attending to this situation.
(b) Critically evaluate each of the options listed by you.
(c) Which of the above, do you think, would be the most appropriate for Sunil to adopt and why?
2. You are Vice Principal of a degree college in one of the middle-class towns. Principal has recently retired and
management is looking for his replacement. There are also feelers that the management may promote you as
principal. In the meantime, during annual examination the flying squad which came from the university caught
two students red-handed involved in unfair means. A senior lecturer of the college was personally helping these
students in this act. This senior lecturer also happens to be close to the management. One of the students was
son of a local politician who was responsible in getting college affiliated to the present reputed university. The
second student was son of a local businessman who has donated maximum funds for running of the college.
You
immediately informed the management regarding this unfortunate incident. The management told you to resolve
the issue with flying squad at any cost. They further said that such incident will not only tarnish the image of the
college but also the politician and businessman are very important personalities for the functioning of the college.

You were also given hint that your further promotion to Principal depends on your capability in resolving this
issue with flying squad. In the meantime, you were intimated by your administrative officer that certain members
of the student union are protesting outside the college gate against the senior lecturer and the students involved
in this incident and demanding strict action against defaulters.
(a) Discuss the ethical issues involved in the case.
(b) Critically examine the options available with you as Vice Principal. What option will you adopt and why?
3. An elevated corridor is being constructed to reduce traffic congestion in the capital of a particular State. You
have been selected as project manager of this prestigious project on your professional competence and
experience. The deadline is to complete the project in next two years by 30 June, 2021, since this project is to be
inaugurated by the Chief Minister before the elections are announced in the second week of July 2021. While
carrying out the surprise inspection by inspecting team, a minor crack was noticed in one of the piers of the
elevated corridor possibly due to poor material used. You immediately informed the chief engineer and stopped
further work. It was assessed by you that minimum three piers of the elevated corridor have to be demolished
and reconstructed. But this process will delay the project minimum by four to six months. But the chief engineer
overruled the observation of inspecting team on the ground that it was a minor crack which will not in any way
impact the strength and durability of the bridge. He ordered you to overlook the observation of inspecting team
and continue working with same speed and tempo. He informed you that the minister does not want any delay as
he wants the Chief Minister to inaugurate the elevated corridor before the elections are declared. Also informed
you that the contractor is far relative of the minister and he wants him to finish the project. He also gave you hint
that your further promotion as additional chief engineer is under consideration with the ministry. However, you
strongly felt that the minor crack in the pier of the elevated corridor will adversely affect the health and life of the
bridge and therefore it will be very dangerous not to repair the elevated corridor.
(a) Under the given conditions, what are the options available to you as a project manager?
(b) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by the project manager?
(c) What are the professional challenges likely to be faced by the project manager and his response to overcome
such challenges?
(d) What can be the consequences of overlooking the observation raised by the inspecting team?
4. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has quickly spread to various countries. As on May 8th, 2020,
in India 56342 positive cases of corona had been reported. India with a population of more than 1.35 billion had
difficulty in controlling the transmission of coronavirus among its population. Multiple strategies became
necessary to handle this outbreak. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of India raised wareness about this
outbreak and to take all necessary actions to control the spread of COVID-19. Indian Government implemented
a 55-day lockdown throughout the country to reduce the transmission of the virus. Schools and colleges had
shifted to alternative mode of teaching-learning-evaluation and certification. Online mode became popular during
these days.
India was not prepared for a sudden onslaught of such a crisis due to limited infrastructure in terms of human
resource, money and other facilities needed for taking care of this situation. This disease did not spare anybody
irrespective of caste, creed, religion on the one hand and ‘have and have not’ on the other. Deficiencies in
hospital

beds, oxygen cylinders, ambulances, hospital staff and crematorium were the most crucial aspects.
You are a hospital administrator in a public hospital at the time when coronavirus had attacked large number of
people and patients were pouring into hospital day in and day out.
(a) What are your criteria and justification for putting your clinical and non-clinical staff to attend to the patients
knowing fully well that it is highly infectious disease and resources and infrastructure are limited?
(b) If yours is a private hospital, whether your justification and decision would remain same as that of a public
hospital?
5. A reputed food product company based in India developed a food product for the international market and
started exporting the same after getting necessary approvals. The company announced this achievement and
also indicated that soon the product will be made available for the domestic consumers with almost same quality
and health benefits. Accordingly, the company got its product approved by the domestic competent authority and
launched the product in Indian market. The company could increase its market share over a period of time and
earn substantial profit both domestically and internationally. However, the random sample test conducted by
inspecting team found the product being sold domestically in variance with the approval obtained from the
competent authority. On further investigation, it was also discovered that the food company was not only selling
products which were not meeting the health standard of the country but also selling the rejected export products
in the domestic market. This episode adversely affected the reputation and profitability of the food company.
(a) What action do you visualise should be taken by the competent authority against the food company for
violating the laid down domestic food standard and selling rejected export products in domestic market?
(b) What course of action is available with the food company to resolve the crisis and bring back its lost
reputation?
(c) Examine the ethical dilemma involved in the case.
6. Pawan is working as an officer in the State Government for the last ten years. As a part of routine transfer, he
was posted to another department. He joined in a new office along with five other colleagues. The head of the
office was a senior officer conversant with the functioning of the office. As a part of general inquiry, Pawan
gathered that his senior officer carries the reputation of being difficult and insensitive person having his
own disturbed family life. Initially, all seemed to go well. However, after some time Pawan felt that the senior
officer was belittling him and at times unreasonable. Whatever suggestions given or views expressed by Pawan
in the meetings were summarily rejected and the senior officer would express displeasure in the presence of
others. It became a pattern of boss’ style of functioning to show him in bad light highlighting his hortcomings and
humiliating publicly. It became apparent that though there were no serious work-related problems/shortcomings,
the senior officer was always on one pretext or the other and would scold and shout at him. The continuous
harassment and public criticism of Pawan resulted in loss of confidence, self-esteem and equanimity. Pawan
realised that his relation with his senior officer was becoming more toxic and due to this, he felt perpetually
tensed, anxious and stressed. His mind was occupied with negativity and caused him mental torture, anguish
and agony. Eventually, it badly affected his personal and family life. He was no longer joyous, happy and
contented even at home. Rather without any reason he would lose his temper with his wife and other family
members. The family environment was no longer pleasant and congenial. His wife who was always supportive to
him also became a victim of his negativity and hostile behaviour. Due to harassment and humiliation suffered by

him in the office, comfort and happiness virtually vanished from his life. Thus, it damaged his physical and
mental health.
(a) What are the options available with Pawan to cope with the situation?
(b) What approach Pawan should adopt for bringing peace, tranquility and congenial environment in the office
and home?
(c) As an outsider, what are your suggestions for both boss and subordinate to overcome this situation and for
improving the work performance, mental and emotional hygiene?
(d) In the above scenario, what type of training would you suggest for officers at various levels in the government
offices?
2020
1. Rajesh Kumar is a senior public servant with a reputation of honesty and forthrightness, currently posted in the
Finance Ministry as Head of the Budget Division. His department is presently busy organizing the budgetary
support to the states, four of which are due to go to the polls within the financial year.
This year’s annual budget had allotted Rs. 8300 crores for the National Housing Scheme (NHS), a centrally
sponsored social housing scheme for the weaker sections of society. `775 crores have been drawn for the NHS
till June.
The Ministry of Commerce had long been pursuing a case for setting up a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in a
southern state to boost exports. After two years of detailed discussions between the centre and state, the Union
Cabinet approved the project in August. The process was initiated to acquire the necessary land.
Eighteen months ago, a leading Public Sector Unit (PSU) had projected the need for setting up a large natural
gas processing plant in a northern state for the regional gas grid. The required land is already in possession of
the PSU. The gas grid is an essential component of the national energy security strategy. After three rounds of
global bidding, the project was allotted to an MNC, M/s XYZ Hydrocarbons. The first tranche of payment to the
MNC is scheduled to be made in December.
Finance Ministry was asked for a timely allocation of an additional Rs. 6000 crores for these two developmental
projects. It was decided to recommend re-appropriation of this entire amount from the NHS allocation. The file
was forwarded to the Budget Department for their comments and further processing. On studying the case file,
Rajesh Kumar realized that this re-appropriation may cause inordinate delay in the execution of NHS, a project
much publicized in the rallies of senior politicians. Correspondingly, non-availability of finances would cause
financial loss in the SEZ and national embarrassment due to delayed payment in an international project.
Rajesh Kumar discussed the matter with his seniors. He was conveyed that this politically sensitive situation
needs to be processed immediately. Rajesh Kumar realized that diversion of funds from the NHS could raise
difficult questions for the government in the Parliament.
Discuss the following with reference to this case:
(a) Ethical issues involved in re-appropriation of funds from a welfare project to the developmental projects.
(b) Given the need for proper utilization of public funds, discuss the options available to Rajesh Kumar. Is

resigning a worthy option?
2. The Chairman of Bharat Missiles Ltd (BML) was watching a program on TV wherein the Prime Minister was
addressing the nation on the necessity of developing a self-reliant India. He subconsciously nodded in
agreement and smiled to himself as he mentally reviewed BML’s journey in the past two decades. BML had
admirably progressed from producing first generation anti-tank guided missiles (ATGMs) to designing and
producing
state of the art ATGM weapon systems that would be the envy of any army. He sighed in reconciliation with his
assumptions that the government would probably not alter the status quo of a ban on exports of military
weaponry.
To his surprise, the very next day he got a telephone call from the Director General, Ministry of Defence, asking
him to discuss the modalities of increasing BML production of ATGMs as there is a possibility of exporting the
same to a friendly foreign country. The Director General wanted the Chairman to discuss the details with his staff
at Delhi next week.
Two days later, at a press conference, the Defence Minister stated that he aims to double the current weapons
export levels within five years. This would give an impetus of financing the development and manufacture of
indigenous weapons in the country. He also stated that all indigenous arms manufacturing nations have a very
good record in international arms trade.
(a) As Chairman of BML, what are your views on the following points?
(b) As an arms exporter of a responsible nation like India, what are the ethical issues involved in arms trade? List
five ethical factors that would influence the decision to sell arms to foreign governments.
3. Rampura, a remote district inhabited by a tribal population, is marked by extreme backwardness and abject
poverty. Agriculture is the mainstay of the local population, though it is primarily subsistence due to the very
small landholdings. There is insignificant industrial or mining activity. Even the targeted welfare programs have
inadequately benefited the tribal population. In this restrictive scenario, the youth has begun to migrate to other
states to supplement the family income. Plight of minor girls is that their parents are persuaded by labour
contractors to send them to work in the Bt Cotton farms of a nearby state. The soft fingers of the minor girls are
well suited for plucking the cotton. The inadequate living and working conditions in these farms have caused
serious health issues for the minor girls. NGOs in the districts of domicile and the cotton farms appear to be
compromised and have not effectively espoused the twin issues of child labour and development of the area.
You are appointed as the District Collector of Rampura. Identify the ethical issues involved. Which specific steps
will you initiate to ameliorate the conditions of minor girls of your district and to improve the overall economic
scenario in the district?
4. You are a municipal commissioner of a large city, having the reputation of a very honest and upright officer. A
huge multipurpose mall is under construction in your city in which a large number of daily wage earners are
employed. One night, during monsoons, a big chunk of the roof collapsed causing instant death of four labourers
including two minors. Many more were seriously injured requiring immediate medical attention. The mishap
resulted in a big hue and cry, forcing the government to institute an enquiry.

Your preliminary enquiry has revealed a series of anomalies. The material used for the construction was of poor
quality. Despite the approved building plans permitting only one basement, an additional basement has been
constructed. This was overlooked during the periodic inspections by the building inspector of the municipal
corporation. In your enquiry, you noticed that the construction of the mall was given the green signal despite
encroaching on areas earmarked for a green belt and a slip road in the Zonal Master Plan of the city. The
permission to construct the mall was accorded by the previous Municipal Commissioner who is not only your
senior and well known to you professionally, but also a good friend.
Prima facie, the case appears to be of a widespread nexus between officials of the Municipal Corporation and
the builders. Your colleagues are putting pressure on you to go slow in the enquiry. The builder, who is rich and
influential, happens to be a close relative of a powerful minister in the state cabinet. The builder is persuading
you to hush up the matter, promising you a fortune to do so. He also hinted that if this matter is not resolved at
the earliest in his favour; there is somebody in his office who is waiting to file a case against you under the
POSH Act.
Discuss the ethical issues involved in the case. What are the options available to you in this situation? Explain
your selected course of action.
5. Parmal is a small but underdeveloped district. It has rocky terrain that is not suitable for agriculture, though
some subsistence agriculture is being done on small plots of land. The area receives adequate rainfall and has
an irrigation canal flowing through it. Amria, its administrative centre, is a medium sized town. It houses a large
district hospital, an Industrial Training Institute and some privately owned skill training centres. It has all the
facilities of a district headquarters. A trunk railway line passes approximately 50 kilometres from Amria. Its poor
connectivity is a major reason for the absence of any major industry therein. The state government offers a 10
years tax holiday as an incentive to new industry.
In 2010 Anil, an industrialist, decided to take benefits to set up Amria Plastic Works (APW) in Noora village,
about 20 km from Amria. While the factory was being built, Anil hired the required key labour and got them
trained at the skill training centres at Amria. This act of his made the key personnel very loyal to APW.
APW started production in 2011 with the labour drawn fully from Noora village. The villagers were very happy to
get employment near their homes and were motivated by the key personnel to meet the production targets with
high quality. APW started making large profits, a sizable portion of which was used to improve the quality of life
in Noora. By 2016, Noora could boast of a greener village and a renovated village temple. Anil liaised with the
local MLA to increase the frequency of the bus services to Amria. The government also opened a primary health
care centre and primary school at Noora in buildings constructed by APW. APW used its CSR funds to set up
women’s self-help groups, subsidize primary education to the village children and procure an ambulance for use
by its employees and the needy.
In 2019, there was a minor fire in APW. It was quickly extinguished as fire safety protocols were in place in the
factory. Investigations revealed that the factory had been using electricity in excess of its authorized capacity.
This was soon rectified. The next year, due to a nationwide lockdown, the requirement of production fell for four

months. Anil decided that all employees would be paid regularly. He employed them to plant trees and improve
the village habitat. APW had developed a reputation of high-quality production and a motivated workforce.
Critically analyse the story of APW and state the ethical issues involved. Do you consider APW as a role model
for development of backward areas? Give reasons.
6. Migrant workers have always remained at the socio-economic margins of our society, silently serving as the
instrumental labour force of urban economics. The pandemic has brought them into national focus.
On announcement of a countrywide lockdown, a very large number of migrant workers decided to move back
from their places of employment to their native villages. The non-availability of transport created its own
problems. Added to this was the fear of starvation and inconvenience to their families. This caused the migrant
workers to demand wages and transport facilities for returning to their villages. Their mental agony was
accentuated by multiple factors such as a sudden loss of livelihood, possibility of lack of food and inability to
assist in harvesting their rabi crop due to not being able to reach home in time. Reports of inadequate response
of some districts in providing the essential boarding and lodging arrangements along the way multiplied their
fears.
You have learnt many lessons from this situation when you were tasked to oversee the functioning of the District
Disaster Relief Force in your district. In your opinion what ethical issues arose in the current migrant crisis? What
do you understand by an ethical care giving state? What assistance can the civil society render to mitigate the
sufferings of migrants in similar situations?
2018
1. Rakesh is a responsible district level officer, who enjoys the trust of his higher officials. Knowing his honesty,
the government entrusted him with the responsibility of identifying the beneficiaries under a health care scheme
meant for senior citizens.
The criteria to be a beneficiary are the following:
(a) 60 years of age or above.
(b) Belonging to a reserved community.
(c) Family income of less than 1 Lakh rupees per annum.
(d) Post-treatment prognosis is likely to be high to make a positive difference to the quality of life of the
beneficiary.
One day, an old couple visited Rakesh’s office with their application. They have been the residents of a village in
his district since their birth. The old man is diagnosed with a rare condition that causes obstruction in the large
intestine. As a consequence, he has severe abdominal pain frequently that prevents him from doing any physical
labour. The couple has no children to support them. The expert surgeon whom they contacted is willing to do the

surgery without charging any fee. However, the couple will have to bear the cost of incidental charges, such as
medicines, hospitalization, etc., to the tune of rupees one lakh. The couple fulfils all the criteria except criterion
‘b’. However, any financial aid would certainly make a significant difference in their quality of life.
How should Rakesh respond to the situation? (250 words)
2. As a senior officer in the Ministry, you have access to important policy decisions and upcoming big
announcements such as road construction projects before they
are notified in the public domain. The Ministry is about to announce a mega road project for which the drawings
are already in place. Sufficient care was taken by the planners to make use of the government land with the
minimum land acquisition from private parties. Compensation rate for private parties was also finalized as per
government rules. Care was also taken to minimize deforestation. Once the project is announced, it is expected
that there will be a huge spurt in real estate prices in and around that area.
Meanwhile, the Minister concerned insists that you realign the road in such a way that it comes closer to his 20
acres farmhouse. He also suggests that he would facilitate the purchase of a big plot of land in your wife name at
the prevailing rate which is very nominal, in and around the proposed mega road project. He also tries to
convince you by saying that there is no harm in it as he is buying the land legally. He even promises to
supplement your savings in case you do not have sufficient funds to buy the land. However, by the act of
realignment, a lot of agricultural lands has to be acquired, thereby causing a considerable financial burden on the
government, and also the displacement of the farmers. As if this is not enough, it will involve cutting down of a
large number of trees denuding the area of its green cover.
Faced with this situation, what will you do? Critically examine various conflicts of interest and explain what your
responsibilities are as a public servant. (250 words)
3. It is a State where prohibition is in force. You are recently appointed as the Super-intendent of Police of a
district notorious for illicit distillation of liquor. The illicit liquor leads to many death, reported and unreported, and
causes a major problem for the district authorities.
The approach till now had been to view it as a law and order problem and tackle it accordingly. Raids, arrest,
police cases, and criminal trials – all these had only limited impact. The problem remains as serious as ever.
Your inspections show that the parts of the district where the distillation flourishes are economically, industrially
and educationally backward. Agriculture is badly affected by poor irrigation facilities. Frequent clashes among
communities gave boost to illicit distillation. No major initiatives had taken place in the past either from the
government’s side or from social organizations to improve the lot of the people.
Which new approach will you adopt to bring the problem under control? (250 words)
4. A big corporate house is engaged in manufacturing industrial chemicals on a large scale. It proposes to set up
an additional unit. Many states rejected its proposal due to the detrimental effect on the environment. But one
state government acceded to the request and permitted the unit close to a city, brushing aside all opposition.

The unit was set up 10 years ago and was in full swing till recently. The pollution caused by the industrial
effluents was affecting the land, water and crops in the area. It was also causing serious health problems to
human beings and animals. This gave rise to a series of agitations demanding the closure of the plant. In a
recent agitation thousands of people took part, creating a law and order problem necessitating stern police
action. Following the public outcry, the State government ordered the closure of the factory.
The closure of the factory resulted in the unemployment of not only those workers who were engaged in the
factory but also those who were working in the ancillary units. It also very badly affected those industry which
depended on the chemicals manufactured by it.
As a senior officer entrusted with the responsibility of handling this issues, how are you going to address it? (250
words)
5. Dr X is a leading medical practitioner in a city. He has set up a charitable trust through which he plans to
establish a super-speciality hospital in the city to cater to the medical needs of all sections of the society.
Incidentally, that part of the State had been neglected over the years. The proposed hospital would be a boon for
the region.
You are heading the tax investigation agency of that region. During an inspection of the doctor’s clinic, your
officers have found out some major irregularities. A few of them are substantial which had resulted in
considerable withholding of tax that should be paid by him now. The doctor is cooperative. He undertakes to pay
the tax immediately.
However, there are certain other deficiencies in his tax compliance which are purely technical in nature. If these
technical defaults are pursued by the agency, considerable time and energy of the doctor will be diverted to
issues which are not so serious, urgent or even helpful to the tax collection process. Further, in all probability, it
will hamper the prospects of the hospital coming up.
There are two options before you:
Taking a broader view, ensure substantial tax compliance and ignore defaults that are merely technical in nature.
Pursue the matter strictly and proceed on all fronts, whether substantial or merely technical.
As the head of the tax agency, which course of action will you opt and why? (250 words)
6. Edward Snowden, a computer expert and former CIA administrator, released confidential Government
documents to the press about the existence of Government surveillance programmes. According to many legal
experts and the US Government, his action violated the Espionage act of 1971, which identified the leak of State
secret as an act of treason. Yet, despite the fact that he broke the law, Snowden argued that he had a moral
obligation to act. He gave a justification for his “whistle blowing” by stating that he had a duty “to inform the public
as to that which is done in there name and that which is done against them.”
According to Snowden, the Government’s violation of privacy had to be exposed regardless of legality since
more substantive issues of social action and public morality were involved here. Many agreed with Snowden.
Few argued that he broke the law and compromised national security, for which he should be held accountable.

Do you agree that Snowden’s actions were ethically justified even if legally prohibited? Why or why not? Make
an argument by weighing the competing values in this case.
(250 words)
2017
1. You are an honest and responsible civil servant. You often observe the following:
(a) There is a general perception that adhering to ethical conduct one may face difficulties to oneself and cause
problems for the family, whereas unfair practices may help to reach the career goals.
(b) When the number of people adopting unfair means is large, a small minority having a penchant towards
ethical means makes no difference.
(c) Sticking to ethical means is detrimental to the larger developmental goals
(d) While one may not involve oneself in large unethical practices, but giving and accepting small gifts makes the
system more efficient.
Examine the above statements with their merits and demerits.
2. You are aspiring to become an IAS officer and you have cleared various stages and now you have been
selected for the personal interview. On the day of the interview, on the way to the venue you saw an accident
where a mother and child who happen to be your relatives were badly injured. They needed immediate help.
What would you have done in such a situation? Justify your action.
3. You are the head of the Human Resources department of an organization. One day one of the workers died
on duty. His family was demanding compensation. However, the company denied compensation because it was
revealed in investigation that he was drunk at the time of the accident. The workers of the company went on to
strike demanding compensation for the family of the deceased. The Chairman of the management board has
asked for your recommendation.
What recommendation would you provide to the management?
Discuss the merits and demerits of each of the recommendation.
4. You are the manager of a spare parts company A and you have to negotiate a deal with the manager of a
large manufacturing company B. The deal is highly competitive and sealing the deal is critical for your company.
The deal is being worked out over a dinner. After dinner the manager of manufacturing company B offered to
drop you to the hotel in his car. On the way to hotel he happens to hit motorcycle injuring the motorcyclist badly.
You know the manager was driving fast and thus lost control. The law enforcement officer comes to investigate
the issue and you are the sole eyewitness to it. Knowing the strict laws pertaining to road accidents you are

aware that your honest account of the incident would lead to the prosecution of the manager and as a
consequence the deal is likely to be jeopardised, which is of immense importance to your company.
What are the dilemmas you face? What will be your response to the situation?
5. A building permitted for three floors, while being extended illegally to 6 floors by a builder, collapses. As a
consequence, a number of innocent labourers including women and children died. These labourers are migrants
of different places. The government immediately announced cash relief to the aggrieved families and arrested
the builder.
Give reasons for such incidents taking place across the country. Suggest measures to prevent their occurrence.
6. You are a Public Information Officer (PIO) in a government department. You are aware that the RTI Act 2005
envisages transparency and accountability in administration. The act has functioned as a check on the
supposedly arbitrarily administrative behaviour and actions. However, as a PIO you have observed that there are
citizens who filed RTI applications not for themselves but on behalf of such stakeholders who purportedly want to
have access to information to further their own interests. At the same time there are these RTI activists who
routinely file RTI applications and attempt to extort money from the decision makers. This type of RTI activism
has affected the functioning of the administration adversely and also possibly jeopardises the genuineness of the
applications which are essentially aimed at getting justice.
What measures would you suggest to separate genuine and non-genuine applications? Give merits and
demerits of your suggestions.
2016
1. A fresh engineering graduate gets a job in a prestigious chemical industry. She likes the work. The salary is
also good. However, after a few months she accidentally discovers that a highly toxic waste is being secretly
discharged into a river nearby. This is causing health problems to the villagers downstream who depend on the
river for their water needs. She is perturbed and mentions her concern to her colleagues who have been with the
company for longer periods. They advise her to keep quite as anyone who mentions the topic is summarily
dismissed. She cannot risk losing her job as she is the sole beard-winner for her family and has to support her
ailing parents and siblings. At first, she thinks that if her seniors are keeping quiet, why should she stick out her
neck. But her conscience pricks her to do something to save the river and the people who depend upon it. At
heart she feels that the advice of silence given by her friends is not correct though she cannot give reasons for it.
She thinks you are a wise person and seeks your advice.
(a) What arguments can you advance to show her that keeping quiet is not morally right?
(b) What course of action would you advice her to adopt and why?
2. Land needed for mining, dams and other largescale projects is acquired mostly from Adivasis, hill dwellers
and rural communities. The displaced persons are paid monetary compensation as per the legal provisions.
However, the payment is often tardy. In any case, it cannot sustain the displaced families for long. These people

do not possess marketable skills to engage in some other accusation. They end up as low paid migrant laborers.
Moreover, the development goes to industries, industrialists and urban communities whereas the costs are
passed on to these poor helpless people. This unjust distribution of costs and benefits is unethical.
Suppose you have been entrusted with the task of drafting a better compensation-cum-rehabilitation policy for
such displaced persons, how would you approach the problem and what would be the main elements of your
suggested policy?
3. Suppose you are an officer in charge of implementing a social service scheme to provide support to old and
destitute women. An old and illiterate woman comes to you to avail the benefits of the scheme. However, she
has no documents to show that she fulfils the eligibility criteria. But after meeting her and listening to her you feel
that she certainly needs support. Your enquiries also show that she is really destitute and living in a pitiable
condition. You are in a dilemma as to what to do. Putting her under the scheme without necessary documents
would clearly be violation of rules. But denying her the support would be cruel and inhuman.
(a) Can you think of a rational way to resolve this dilemma?
(b) Give your reasons for it.
4. You are a young, aspiring and sincere employee in a Government office working as an assistant to the director
of your department. Since you have joined recently, you need to lean and progress. Luckily your superior is very
kind and ready to train you for your job. He is a very intelligent and well-informed person having knowledge of
various departments. In short, you respect your boss and are looking forward to lean a lot from him.
Since you have good tuning with the boss, he started depending on you. One day due to ill health he invited you
at his place for finishing some urgent work. You reached his house and before you could ring the bell you heard
shouting noises. You waited for a while. After entering the house the boss greeted you and explained the work.
But you were constantly disturbed by the crying of a woman. At last, you inquired with the boss but his answer
did not satisfy you.
Next day, you were compelled to inquire further in the office and found out that his behavior is very bad at home
with his wife. He also beats up bit wife. His wife is not well educated and is a simple woman in comparison to her
husband. you see that though your boss is a nice person in the office, he is engaged in domestic violence at
home. In such a situation, you are left with the following options. Analyse each option with its consequences.
(a) Just ignore thinking about it because it is their personal matter.
(b) Repost the case to the appropriate authority.
(c) Your own innovative approach towards situation.
5. ABC Ltd. is a large transnational company having diversified business activities with a huge shareholder base.
The company is continuously expanding the generating employment. The company, in its expansion and
diversification programme, decides to establish a new plant at Vikaspuri, an area which is underdeveloped. The

new plant is designed to use energy efficient technology that will help the company to save production cost by
20%. The company’s decision goes well with the Government policy of attracting investment to develop such
underdeveloped regions. The government has also announced tax holiday for five years for the companies that
invest in underdeveloped areas. However, the new plant may bring chaos for the inhabitants of Vikaspuri region,
which is otherwise tranquil. The new plant may result in increased cost of living, aliens migrating to the region,
disturbing the social and economic order. The company sensing the possible protest tried to educate the people
of Vikaspuri region and public in general that how its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policy would help
overcome the likely difficulties of the residents of Vikaspuri region. In spite of this the protests begin and some of
the residents decided to approach the judiciary as their plea before the Government did not yield any result.
(a) Identify the issues involved in the case.
(b) What can be suggested to satisfy the company’s goal and to address the residents’ concern?
6. Saraswati was a successful IT professional in USA. Moved by patriotic sense of doing something for the
country she returned to India. Together with some other like-minded friends, she formed an NGO to build a
school for a poor rural community.The objective of the school was to provide the best quality modern education
at a nominal cost. She soon discovered that she has to seek permission from a number of Government
agencies. The rules and procedures were quite confusing and cumbersome. What frustrated her most were
delays, callous attitude of officials and constant demand for bribes. Her experience and the experience of many
others like her have deterred people from taking up social service projects.
A measure of Government control over voluntary social work is necessary. But it should not be exercised in a
coercive a corrupt manner. What measures can you suggest to ensure that due control is exercised but well
meaning, honest NGO efforts are not thwarted?
2015
1. A private company is known for its efficiency, transparency and employee welfare. The company though
owned by a private individual has a cooperative character where employees feel a sense of ownership. The
company employs nearly 700 personnel and they have voluntarily decided not to form a union.
One day suddenly in the morning, about 40 men belonging to a political party gatecrashed into the factory
demanding jobs in the factory. They threatened the management and employees, and also used foul language.
The employees feel demoralized. It was clear that those people who gate-crashed wanted to be on the payroll of
the company as well as continue as the volunteers/members of the party The company maintains high standards
in integrity and does not extend favours to civil administration that also includes law enforcement agency. Such
incidents occur in public sector also.
(a) Assume you are the CEO of the company. What would you do to diffuse the volatile situation on the date of
gate-crashing with the violent mob sitting inside the company premises?
(b) What could be the long-term solution to the issue discussed in the case?

(c) Every solution/action that you suggest will have a positive and a negative impact on you (as CEO), the
employees and the performance of the employees. Analyze the consequences of each of your suggested
actions.
2. You are the Sarpanch of a Panchayat. There is a primary school run by the government in your area. Midday
meals are provided to the children attending the school. The Headmaster has now appointed a new cook in the
school to prepare the meals. However, when it is found that the cook is from Dalit community, almost half of the
children belonging to higher castes are not allowed to take meals by their parents. Consequently the attendance
in the school falls sharply. This could result in the possibility of discontinuation of midday meal scheme,
thereafter of teaching staff and subsequent closing down the school.
(a) Discuss some feasible strategies to overcome the conflict and to create right ambience.
(b) What should be the responsibilities of different social segments and agencies to create positive social
ambience for accepting such changes?
3. One of the scientists working in the R & D laboratory of a major pharmaceutical company discovers that one of
the company’s best selling veterinary drugs, B has the potential to cure a currently incurable liver disease that is
prevalent in tribal areas. However, developing a variant of the drug suitable for human beings entailed a lot of
research and development having a huge expenditure to the extent of f 50 crores. It was unlikely that the
company would recover the costs as the disease was rampant only in poverty-stricken area having very little
market otherwise. If you were the CEO, then—
(a) identify the various actions that you could take;
(b) evaluate the pros and cons of each of your actions.
4. There is a disaster-prone State having frequent landslides, forest fires, cloudbursts, flash floods and
earthquakes, etc. Some of these are seasonal and often unpredictable. The magnitude of the disaster is always
unanticipated. During one of the seasons, a cloudburst caused devastating floods and landslides leading to high
casualties. There was major damage to infrastructure like roads, bridges and power generating units. This led to
more than 100000 pilgrims, tourists and other locals trapped across different routes and locations. The people
trapped in your area of responsibility included senior citizens, patients in hospitals, women and children, hikers,
tourists, ruling party’s regional president along with his family, additional chief secretary of the neighbouring State
and prisoners in jail.
As a civil services officer of the State, what would be the order in which you would rescue these people and
why? Give justifications.
5. You are heading a district administration in a particular department. Your senior officer calls you from the State
Headquarters and tells you that a plot in Rampur village is to have a building constructed on it for a school. A
visit is scheduled during which he will visit the site along with the chief engineer and the senior architect. He
wants you to check out all the papers relating to it and to ensure that the visit is properly arranged. You examine
the file which relates to the period before you joined the department. The land was acquired from the local

Panchayat at a nominal cost and the papers show that clearance certificates are available from the two of the
three authorities who have to certify the site’s suitability. There is no certification by the architect available on file.
You decide to visit Rampur to ensure that all is in order as stated on file. When you visit Rampur, you find that
the plot under reference is part of Thakurgarh Fort and that the walls, ramparts, etc., are running across it. The
fort is well away from the main village, therefore a school here will be a serious inconvenience for the children.
However, the area near the village has potential to expand into a larger residential area. The development
charges on the existing plot, at the fort, will be very high and the question of heritage site has not been
addressed. Moreover, the Sarpanch, at the time of acquisition of the land, was a relative of your predecessor.
The whole transaction appears to have been done with some vested interest.
(a) List the likely vested interests of the concerned parties.
(b) Some of the options for action available to you are listed below. Discuss the merits and demerits of each of
the options:
You can await the visit of the superior officer and let him take a decision.
You can seek his advice in writing or on phone.
You can consult your predecessor/colleagues, etc., and then decide what to do.
You can find out if any alternate plot can be got in exchange and then send a comprehensive written report. Can
you suggest any other option with proper justification?
6. You are recently posted as district development officer of a district. Shortly thereafter you found that there is
considerable tension in the rural areas of your district on the issue of sending girls to schools.
The elders of the village feel that many problems have come up because girls are being educated and they are
stepping out of the safe environment of the household. They are of the view that the girls should be quickly
married off with minimum education. The girls are also competing for jobs after education, which have
traditionally remained in boys’ exclusive domain, adding to unemployment amongst male population.
The younger generation feels that in the present era, girls should have equal opportunities for education and
employment, and other means of livelihood. The entire locality is divided between the elders and the younger lot
and further sub-divided between sexes in both generations. You come to know that in Panchayat or in other local
bodies or even in busy crossroads, the issue is being acrimoniously debated.
One day you are informed that an unpleasant incident has taken place. Some girls were molested, when they
were en route to schools. The incident led to clashes between several groups and a law and order problem has
arisen. The elders after heated discussion have taken a joint decision not to allow girls to go to school and to
socially boycott all such families, which do not follow their dictate.
(a) What steps would you take to ensure girls’ safety without disrupting their education?
(b) How would you manage and mould patriarchic attitude of the village elders to ensure harmony in the
inter-generational relations?
2014

1. Now-a-days, there is an increasing thrust on economic development all around the globe. At the same time,
there is also an increasing concern about environmental degradation caused by development. Many a time, we
face a direct conflict between developmental activity and environmental quality. It is neither feasible to stop or
curtail the developmental process, nor it is advisable to keep degrading the environment, as it threatens our very
survival.
Discuss some feasible strategies which could be adopted to eliminate this conflict and which could lead to
sustainable development.
2. Suppose one of your close friends, who is also aspiring for civil services, comes to you for discussing some of
the issues related to ethical conduct in public service. He raises the following points:
In the present times, when unethical environment is quite prevalent, individual attempts to stick to ethical
principles may cause a lot of problems in one's career. It may also cause hardship to the family members as well
as risk to one's life. Why should we not be pragmatic and follow the path of least resistance, and be happy with
doing whatever good we can?
When so many people are adopting wrong means and are grossly harming the system, what difference would it
make if only a small minority tries to be ethical? They are going to be rather ineffective and are bound to get
frustrated.
If we become fussy about ethical considerations, will it not hamper the economic progress of our country? After
all, in the present age of high competition, we cannot afford to be left behind in the race of development.
It is understandable that we should not get involved in grossly unethical practices, but giving and accepting small
gratifications and doing small favours increases everybody's motivation. It also makes the system more efficient.
What is wrong in adopting such practices?
Critically analyze the above viewpoints. On the basis of this analysis, what will be your advice to your friend?
3. You are a no-nonsense, honest officer. You have been transferred to a remote district to head a department
that is notorious for its inefficiency and callousness. You find that the main cause of the poor state of affairs is the
indiscipline of a section of employees. They do not work themselves and also disrupt the working of others. You
first warned the troublemakers to mend their ways or else face disciplinary action. When the warning had little
effect, you issued a show cause notice to the ringleaders. As a retaliatory measure, these troublemakers
instigated a woman employee amongst them to file a complaint of sexual harassment against you with the
Women's Commission. The Commission promptly seeks your explanation. The matter is also publicized in the'
media to embarrass you further. Some of the options to handle this situation could be as follows:
Give your explanation to the Commission and go soft on the disciplinary action.
Ignore the Commission and proceed firmly with the disciplinary action.
Brief your higher-ups seek directions from them and act accordingly.
Suggest any other possible option(s). Evaluate all of them and suggest the best course of action, giving your
reasons for it.
4. (i) Suppose you are the CEO of a company that manufactures specialized electronic equipment used by a
government department. You have submitted your bid for the supply of this equipment to the department. Both

the quality and cost of your offer are better than those of the competitors. Yet the concerned officer is demanding
a hefty bribe for approving the tender. Getting the order is important both for you and for your company. Not
getting the order would mean closing a production line. It may ay also affect your own career. However, as a
value-conscious person, you do not want to give bribe.
(ii) Valid arguments can be advanced both for giving the bribe and getting the order, and for refusing to pay the
bribe and risking the loss of the order. What those arguments could be? Could there be any better way to get out
of this dilemma? If so, outline the main elements of this third way, pointing out its merits.
5. Rameshwar successfully cleared the prestigious civil services examination and was excited about the
opportunity that he would get through the civil services to serve the country. However, soon after joining the
services, he realized that things are not as rosy as he had imagined.
He found a number of malpractices prevailing in the department assigned to him. For example, funds under
various schemes and grants were being misapproved. The official facilities were frequently being used for
personal needs by the officers and staff. After sometime, he noticed that the process of recruiting the staff was
also not up to the mark. Prospective candidates were required to write an examination in which a lot of cheating
was going on. Some candidates were provided external help in the examination. Rameshwar brought these
incidents to the notice of his seniors. However, he was advised to keep his eyes, ears and mouth shut and ignore
all these things which were taking place with the connivance of the higher-ups. Rameshwar felt highly
disillusioned and uncomfortable. He comes to you seeking your advice.
Indicate various options that you think are available in this situation. How would you help him to evaluate these
options and choose the most appropriate path to be adopted?
6. In our country, the migration of rural people to towns and cities is increasing drastically. This is causing serious
problems both in the rural as well as in the urban areas. In fact, things are becoming really unmanageable. Can
you analyze this problem in detail and indicate not only the socio-economic but also the emotional and attitudinal
factors responsible for this problem? Also, distinctly bring out why:
(a) Educated rural youth are trying to shift to urban areas;
(b) Landless poor peiople are migrating to urban slums;
(c) Even some farmers are selling off their land and trying to settle in urban areas taking up petty jobs.
What feasible steps can you suggest which will be effective in controlling this serious problem of our country?
2013
1. A Public Information Officer has received an application under RTI Act. Having gathered the information, the
PIO discovers that the information pertains to some of the decisions taken by him, which were found to be not
altogether right. There were other employees also who were party to these decisions. Disclosure of the
information is likely to lead to disciplinary action with possibility of punishment against him as well as some of his

colleagues. Non-disclosure or part disclosure or camouflaged disclosure of information will result into lesser
punishment or no punishment.
The PIO is otherwise an honest and conscientious person but this particular decision, on which the RTI
application has been filed, turned out to be wrong. He comes to you for advice.
The following are some suggested options. Please evaluate the merits and demerits of each of the options:
The PIO could refer the matter to his superior officer and seek his advice and act strictly in accordance with the
advice, even though he is not completely in agreement with the advice of the superior.
The PIO could proceed on leave and leave the matter to be dealt by his successor in office or request for
transfer of the application to another PIO.
The PIO could weigh the consequences of disclosing the information truthfully, including the effect on his career,
and reply in a manner that would not place him or his career in jeopardy, but at the same time a little compromise
can be made on the contents of the information.
The PIO could consult his other colleagues who are party to the decision and take action as per their advice.
Also please indicate (without necessarily restricting to the above options) what you would like to advise, giving
proper reasons.
2. You are working as an Executive Engineer in the construction cell of a Municipal Corporation and are
presently in-charge of the construction of a flyover. There are two Junior Engineers under you who have the
responsibility of day-to-day inspection of the site and are reporting to you, while you are finally reporting to the
Chief Engineer who heads the cell. While the construction is heading towards completion, the Junior Engineer
have been regularly reporting that all construction is taking place as per design specifications. However, in one of
your surprise inspections, you have noticed some serious deviations and lacunae which, in your opinion, are
likely to affect the safety of the flyover. Rectification of these lacunae at this stage would require a substantial
amount of demolition and rework which will cause a tangible loss to the contractor and will also delay completion.
There is a lot of public pressure on the Corporation to get this construction completed because of heavy traffic
congestion in the area.
When you brought this matter to the notice of the Chief Engineer, he advised you that in his opinion it is not a
very serious lapse and may be ignored. He advised for further expediting the project for completion in time.
However, you are convinced that this was a serious matter which might affect public safety and should not be left
unaddressed. What will you do in such a situation?
Some of the options are given below. Evaluate the merits and demerits of each of these options and finally
suggest what course of action you would like to take, giving reasons.
Follow the advice of the Chief Engineer and go ahead.

Make exhaustive report of the situation bringing out all facts and analysis along with your own viewpoints stated
clearly and seek for written orders from the Chief Engineer.
Call for explanation from the Junior Engineers and issue orders to the contractor for necessary correction within
targeted time.
Highlight the issue so that it reaches superiors above the Chief Engineer.
Considering the rigid attitude of the Chief Engineer, seek transfer from the project or report sick.
3. So far as child labor norms for hazardous industries like firecrackers industry are concerned, International
Labour Organization (ILO) has set the minimum age as 18 years. In India, however, this age is 14 years. The
units in industrial clusters of firecrackers can be classified into registered and non-registered entities. One typical
unit is household based work
Though the law is clear on the use of child labour employment norms in registered/ non-registered units, it does
not include household based works. Household based work means children working under the supervision of
their parents/relative. To evade child labor norms, several units project themselves as household-based works
but employ children from outside.
Needless to say that employing children saves the costs for these units leading to higher profits to the owner. On
your visit to one of the units at Sivakasi, the owner takes you around the unit which has about 10-15 children
below 14 years of age. The owner tells you that in his household-based unit, the children are all his relatives.
You notice that several children smirk, when the owner tells you this. On deeper enquiry, you figure out that
neither the owner nor the children are able to satisfactorily establish their relationship with each other.
(a) bring out and discuss the ethical issues involved in the above case.
(b) What would be your reaction after your above visit?
4. You are heading a leading technical institute of the country. The institute is planning to convene an interview
panel shortly under your chairmanship for selection of the post of professors. A few days before the interview,
you get a call from the Personal Secretary (PS) of a senior government functionary seeking your intervention in
favor of the selection of a close relative of the functionary for this post. The PS also informs you that he is aware
of the long pending and urgent proposal of our institute for grant of funds for modernization, which are awaiting
the functionary’s approval. He assures you that he would get these proposals cleared.
(a) What are the options available to you?
(b) Evaluate each of these options and choose the option which you would adopt, giving reasons.
5. As a senior officer in the Finance Ministry, you have access to some confidential and crucial information about
policy decisions that the Government is about to announce.

These decisions are likely to have farreaching impact on the housing and construction industry. If the builders
have access to this information beforehand, they can make huge profits. One of the builders has done a lot of
quality work for the Government and is known to be close to your immediate superior, who asks you to disclose
this information to the said builder.
(a) What are the options available to you?
(b) Evaluate each of these options and choose the options which you would adopt, giving reasons.
6. You are the Executive Director of an upcoming Infotech Company which is making a name for itself in the
market. Mr. A, who is a star performer, is heading the marketing team. In a short period of one year, he has
helped in doubling the revenues as well as creating a high brand equity for the company so much so that you are
thinking of promoting him.
However, you have been receiving information from many corners about his attitude towards the female
colleagues; particularly his habit of making loose comments on women. In addition, he regularly sends indecent
SMS’ to all the team members including his female colleagues. One day, late in the evening, Mrs. X, who is one
of Mr. A’s Team members, comes you visibly disturbed. She complains against the continued misconduct of Mr.
A, who has been making undesirable advances towards her and has even tried to touch her inappropriately in
his cabin. She tenders her resignation and leaves your office.

